Rice ( Oryza sativa ) is the staple food for more than 3 billion people in the world . 
Globally , rice is grown in more than 100 countries , with an area of 154 million ha and production around 600 million tonnes and productivity is 3.9 tonnes ha . 
Among rice growing countries , India India the largest area under rice in the world . 
In respect of production , however , India takes second position with 131.2 million tonnes of coarse rice . 
In India , rice is cultivated on 44.6 million ha area with a production of 132 tonnes and average productivity of 2.97 tonnes ha and 131.2 million tonnes of coarse rice is grown in India all the states in India , with Uttar Punjab , West Bengal and Punjab being leading states in area , production and productivity , respectively ( 2 ) . 
Punjab has the highest productivity of rice among all the states . 
Around 90 % of rice the world is grown in Asia . 
rice provides about 29.4 % of total calories capita day in Asian countries . 
Milled rice contains usually 6-7% protein.
The fat content in rice is low (2.0-2.5%) and much of fat is lost during milling.
Rice cultivation extends from sea level to as high as 3000 m above mean sea level ( amsl ) in India . 
High temperature, high humidity and high rainfall have considerable effect on growth and development of rice plant.
Rice crop is grown during Kharif season in north-western plains zone , but in south and north-eastern parts of Kharif.
Rice crop grown in all the three seasons , as these areas do not have very cold weather during winter . 
Rice crop needs a hot and humid climate . 
Rice crop is essentially a C 3 plant . 
The wide range of agro-climatic conditions suggests an equally wide variety of soils.
As regards texture, rice is grown on loamy sands in Punjab to heavy clay loams or clays in Andhra Pradesh and some other states.
Soils having good water holding capacity with good amount of clay and organic matter are ideal for puddled rice.
Rice is sown directly in dry soil -LRB- dry seeding -RRB- or wet soil ( wet seeding ) , and irrigation is given to keep dry soil -LRB- dry seeding -RRB- sufficiently moist for good plant growth , but dry soil -LRB- dry seeding -RRB- is never flooded.
Dry system of rice cultivation is followed in uplands.
Sowing of rice is usually done in May-June in the case of Rice crop and in September for Rice crop . 
Three methods are commonly followed in sowing dry and semi-dry crop.
Three methods are broadcasting , drillingor sowing in furrows behind country plough , and dibbling in general , a seed rate of 30-50 kg ha is required for drilling , while 60 00 kg ha is required for broadcasting . 
A row spacing of 15-20 cm is optimum for upland rice.
There are mainly two methods of direct seeding.
about 3000-5000 litres water is required to produce 1 kg rice.
The principal water loss processes from paddy fields are via run-off, percolation, seepage and evapotranspiration or consumptive water use.
The submergence (2-5 cm) throughout the crop growth period is conducive to higher yields.
Under water scarcity , the practice of intermittent submergence during the critical stages ( tillering , flowering ) and maintenance of saturation or field capacity in rest of the critical stages is recommended . 